Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on error spotting.
Let's unpack the mystery of this
concept without needing a PhD or a
panic attack concept explanation.
All right, so what
exactly is error spotting?
Well, it's a super important part
of the English language section in
various competitive examinations.
Especially your exam.
Basically, they give you a
sentence, usually broken into
a few parts, say four or five.
Your main job is to play detective and
find the part that has a grammatical,
goof up, a spelling hiccup, a wrong word
choice, or any other linguistic blunder
if the sentence is clean as a whistle.
No errors at all.
Then you just pick the no error option.
Simple right to truly ace
error spotting my friends.
You need to have your grammar
fundamentals rock solid.
This means you should know your
parts of speech inside out.
Nouns, pronouns, verbs,
adjectives, adverbs.
Prepositions Conjunctions, interjections
Plus Master Your Tenses, subject Verb
agreement, articles, prepositions,
conditionals, parallelism, and those
tricky common idiomatic expressions.
The errors you see are often quite
subtle, designed to test your nuanced
understanding of English rules.
It's not just about pointing
out a mistake, but also knowing
why it's a mistake and what
the correct way should be.
It's like knowing the why behind why your
mom always tells you to clean your room.
This section, my dear friends, aims to
equip you with the fundamental knowledge
and analytical skills needed to pinpoint
errors accurately and efficiently.
We are going to break down the.
Common types of errors you'll encounter
in these exams and provide clear,
concise explanations to help you grasp
those underlying grammatical principles.
So, buckle up, real world relevance.
Now, why is understanding and
spotting errors in language so vital
even beyond just passing exams?
Well imagine an officer that's you in the
future, hopefully dealing with official
documents and public interactions.
Clarity in communication is like
the secret ingredient for success.
Think about it.
Clarity in communication ensures
precise understanding in official
correspondence and verbal interactions.
No room for.
What did they mean by that?
Here, professional credibility reflects
attention to detail and professionalism.
In all your written and spoken exchanges,
you don't want to look like you just woke
up and decided to write a document, right?
Accurate documentation prevents
misinterpretation in legal
and financial documents.
One, misplaced comma can
cost millions, literally.
Effective reporting enables
concise and error-free reports for
internal and external stakeholders.
Nobody wants to read a report that
looks like a tangled mess of wires.
Public relations maintains a
positive image of the institution
through flawless public statements.
You want to impress, not depress policy.
Interpretation is crucial for
correctly understanding and applying
complex policies and regulations.
Misunderstand a policy and poof.
Trouble breakdown of question types based
on our deep dive into past exam patterns
in your exam and similar examinations.
The recurring question formats in
error spotting, mostly focus on
various grammatical concepts while
the exact percentages might swing a
bit year to year, the general lineup
usually looks something like this.
Subject verb agreement
takes a good chunk about.
20 to 25% of the pie.
These are errors where the verb just
isn't agreeing with its subject in
number, like a singular subject,
trying to dance with a plural verb.
Tenses are old friends
account for 15 to 20%.
These are mistakes in using the
right verb tenses, past, present,
future, perfect continuous forms.
It's like mixing up your timelines.
Prepositions snag about 10 to 15% think
incorrect use of on in at four with,
or even missing one, where it should
be they are small but mighty articles.
Those tiny A and and the also grab
10 to 15% errors here are about using
definite the and indefinite a and wrongly.
Parts of speech, specifically adjectives
and adverbs contribute 10 to 15%.
This is where you misuse an
adjective instead of an adverb
or miss up comparative forms.
It's about knowing who modifies whom
pronouns sneak in with five to 10%
errors in pronoun agreement number,
gender case, or when a pronoun
reference is just too confusing.
Conjunctions the sentence connectors
get five to 10% incorrect use of and,
but or nor either or neither nor or
parallelism issues parallelism itself
where sentences lack parallel structure
enlists or comparisons accounts for
five to 7% conditional sentences.
Those if then statements
make up three to 5% errors in
their structure can be tricky.
And then we have miscellaneous
issues about five to 10%.
Covering errors related to idiomatic
expressions, phrasal verbs, or just
plain unnecessary repetition of words.
This breakdown, my friends
clearly shows you where to put
your focus during preparation.
A strong grip on these grammatical
concepts will seriously boost
your accuracy in error spotting.
Trust me, it's like having a map to a
hidden treasure formulas and tricks.
Now don't expect actual mathematical
formulas for error spotting.
We're not doing calculus here,
but we do have key grammatical
rules and some quick tricks that
act as your guiding principles.
Memorizing these will seriously speed
up your error identification process.
It's like having cheat codes for the game.
Let's talk about the
key grammatical rules.
These are your formulas,
subject verb agreement, SVA.
This is fundamental singular.
Subject means a singular verb.
For example, he runs or
the dog barks, plural.
Subject means a plural verb
like they run, or the dogs bark.
Trick, always identify the
true subject, ignore all those
pesky intervening phrases.
For instance, in one of the boys is
here, one is the subject, not boys.
So it's is.
Parallelism items in a list or comparison
must be in the same grammatical form.
For example, he likes to swim,
to run and to cycle, or he likes
swimming, running, and cycling.
You can't mix and match
like a fashion disaster.
Trick look for conjunctions like
and or, but connecting elements.
They demand balance.
Pronoun agreement pronouns must
agree with their antecedents
in number, gender and person.
For instance, each friend must
bring his or her own book trick.
Check if the pronoun clearly refers
to a specific noun and matches it.
No identity crisis for pronouns, please.
Tense consistency.
Maintain a consistent tense throughout
a sentence or paragraph unless
there's a super clear reason to shift.
Trick.
Look for time indicators like yesterday.
Now, next week, ensure your verbs
are playing along with the timeline.
Adjective versus adverb.
Adjectives modify nouns or
pronouns like he is a good singer.
Adverbs, on the other hand, modify
verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs.
For example, he sings well
Trick if it describes an action.
It's usually an adverb, and
many times it'll end in ly.
Prepositional usage specific
prepositions are used with certain
words or in specific contexts.
For example, you agree with a person,
but you agree to a proposal trick.
Pay attention to common phrasal verbs
and fixed prepositional phrases.
They are like set pairs.
You can't just break them up.
Articles A and the A or an for
indefinite, singular countable nouns.
Remember, an is for vowel sounds.
The is for specific or
already mentioned nouns.
Trick check if the noun is
specific or general, and if
it's countable or uncountable.
Now, for some exam specific tricks,
because we want to be smart, not just
study us, read the entire sentence.
Don't just stop at the first
potential error you spot.
Sometimes an error in one
part is explained or even
required by another part.
It's like finding half a clue
and jumping to conclusions.
Look for common traps.
Examiners love to test
frequently confused words.
Think, effect versus effect.
Lie versus lay, than versus.
Then these are like their favorite snares.
Eliminate no error.
Last, always assume there's an error
only, and I mean only select no
error if you are absolutely hundred
percent certain After checking.
Every single part, focus
on grammatical structure.
Mentally break down the sentence
into clauses and phrases.
Check their internal
consistency and how they relate.
It's like dismantling a complex
machine to find the loose screw.
Trust your ear with caution.
While a sentence might sound
wrong, always back it up with
a specific grammatical rule.
Your ear can be a good initial
hint, but it's not the final judge.
Your ear can play tricks on
you just like that uncle who
always says he'll pay you back.
Methods of solving.
Solving error, spotting questions
systematically, my friends can
seriously boost your accuracy.
Here are some distinct approaches
to tackle these problems like a pro.
First up, read the sentence carefully.
First pass.
Start by reading the entire sentence once,
just get the overall meaning and flow.
This initial read helps you spot
any glaring errors or awkward
framing that immediately jumps out.
Pay close attention to the context
and what the sentence is trying to say
Next segment and analyze Second pass.
Part by part now mentally, or if
you are allowed physically, break
down the sentence into its marked
parts, A, B, C, D, and so on.
Examine each part individually
for potential errors.
This involves a checklist,
subject word agreement.
Does the word match?
Its subject in number, like are
they singing in tune, tense?
Consistency?
Is the tense used correctly and
consistently throughout the sentence?
No time travel without a reason,
please, pronoun agreement.
Do those pronouns agree with their
antecedents in number, gender and case?
Are they wearing the
right matching outfits?
Articles and prepositions
are the correct articles.
A and the and prepositions used these
little words can make a big difference.
Adjectives and adverbs are
they used correctly to modify
nouns, pronouns and verbs.
Adjectives, adverbs, respectively.
Is everyone doing their job right?
Conjunctions are coordinating
and subordinating.
Conjunctions used correctly to
connect clauses and phrases.
Are they building bridges properly?
Parallelism are elements in a series
or comparison grammatically parallel,
no lopsided structures, word usage.
Are there any commonly confused
words like effect and effect, or.
Principle and principle used incorrectly.
Don't fall for these classic traps.
Then identify the core error.
Once you spot a potential
error, confirm it.
Recall the specific grammatical
rule it's violating.
Don't just go by what sounds
right or sounds wrong.
Always pinpoint the
grammatical rule being broken.
If you find more than one potential
error, prioritize the most
fundamental grammatical error.
For example, subject word
agreement often takes precedence
over subtle word choice issues.
It's like finding the
biggest crack in the wall.
First, consider alternatives
and corrections.
Mentally rephrase the erroneous part
with the correct grammatical structure.
This helps confirm your
error identification.
If you just can't find a clear error,
reread the sentence this time, focusing
on different grammatical aspects.
Finally, final review.
No error.
Check.
If after a super thorough analysis
of all parts you truly can't find
any grammatical error, then and only
then consider the no error option.
This should be your last resort
because let's be honest, most questions
are designed to have an error.
They don't just put no
error there for fun.
Now for different question formats,
if the sentence is divided into
parts, use the segment by segment
analysis we just discussed.
Pay extra attention to the
transitions between parts.
For sentence improvement
or correction questions.
First, identify the error
in the original sentence.
Then look for the option that corrects
it perfectly while keeping the original
meaning and grammar intact for.
Fill in the blanks, grammar
based, analyze the context of the
blank and the surrounding words
to figure out the required part
of speech tense or agreement.
Then pick the option that fits both
grammatically and contextually.
Remember my friends.
Consistent practice with these
methods will build your intuition
and speed In identifying errors,
you'll become error spotting ninjas,
shortcuts, and smart techniques.
All right, my friends, to really
optimize your performance under
exam time pressure, let's talk about
some smart techniques and shortcuts.
It's all about working
smarter, not just harder.
First scan for obvious agreement issues.
First, quickly check for
subject verb agreement and
pronoun antecedent agreement.
These errors are super common and often
easy to spot, like a bright red flag.
Example, the team are celebrating.
Error here.
Team is singular when acting as
a unit, so it should be is next.
Look for prepositional phrases.
Errors often hide in these little guys.
If a preposition seems
a bit off, question it.
Many verbs and nouns love to hang
out with specific prepositions.
Example, he is good in mathematics.
Error should be at mathematics.
We are good at.
Add something not in it unless you are
literally swimming in math equations.
Always check for parallelism in lists.
When you see a list like A, B, and
C, make sure all items are wearing
the same grammatical uniform.
All nouns, all verbs in the same tense.
All gers, you get the drift example.
She likes to sing, dancing, and
to paint error inconsistent forms.
It should be to sing, to dance, and to
paint or singing, dancing and painting.
Verify tense, consistency.
Read through the sentence,
specifically checking the verbs.
Does the timeline make sense?
Are there any unnecessary jumps and tense?
It's like time traveling without a permit.
Example, he went to the
market and buys some fruits.
Error.
When is past buys is present.
Pick a timeline and stick to it.
Identify adjective or adverb.
Mixups.
If a word is describing a
verb, it should generally be
an adverb, often ending in LY.
If it's describing a
noun, it's an adjective.
Simple example, she sings
Good error should be well.
Well, is the adverb modifying sings
unless she is a good singer, in which
case good is an adjective for singer.
Focus on conjunctions.
Pay special attention to those
correlative conjunctions.
Either or neither nor not only,
but also they demand parallel
structures following them.
Example, he is not only
intelligent, but also a good singer.
This one's correct.
Intelligent is an adjective.
A good singer is a noun phrase here.
They function parallel as
descriptions of he the no error trap.
Don't be scared to choose no error, but
make it your very last consideration.
Only select it if you've really, really
checked every part and every rule.
It's like finding a needle in a haystack,
but sometimes the needle just isn't there.
Try reading backwards mentally.
Sometimes reading the sentence from
end to beginning can help you catch
errors you missed during a forward read.
It breaks the natural flow and
forces your brain to focus on
individual words and phrases.
A bit like seeing things
from a different angle.
Isolate clauses for those
long complex sentences.
Mentally separate the independent
and dependent clauses.
Check each clause for internal grammatical
correctness, and then ensure they are
correctly joined, like taking apart a
complicated toy and checking each piece.
And finally, practice
with timers regularly.
Practice error spotting
questions under timed conditions.
This will improve both
your speed and accuracy.
It helps internalize the common
error patterns so you can spot them
faster than a bank robber in a vault.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Even seasoned candidates, my
friends, fall prey to certain
common errors and misconceptions.
Being aware of these can
help you dodge those bullets.
First, the misconception, if it
sounds right, it's right explanation.
Our spoken language, especially
in informal settings, often
takes shortcuts and deviates
from strict grammatical rules.
Many phrases that sound perfectly fine in
casual chat are grammatically incorrect.
Always, always rely on grammatical
rules, not just your ear.
Your ear can be a deceptive friend.
Mistake ignoring the
subject in long sentences.
Explanation in complex sentences
with lots of intervening phrases.
It's super easy to lose
track of the actual subject.
This leads straight to
subject verb agreement errors.
Always, always identify the main
subject, first example, the list of
items, including the rare artifacts
and ancient scrolls were stolen.
Error.
The subject here is list, which is
singular, so it should be was stolen.
The stuff in between is just extra
luggage mistake, confusing, homophones,
and easily confused words, explanation,
words that sound alike, but have.
Different meanings, homophones
or words that are frequently
interchanged, like effect or effect.
Lose or lose than, or then it's,
or it's there or there, or there
are common sources of error.
Example, the effect of the medicine
was immediate error should be effect.
Effect is usually a noun
effect is usually a verb.
Misconception.
All collective nouns are singular.
Explanation.
Collective nouns like team, family
committee can be singular or plural.
It depends on whether the members are
acting as a single unit or as individuals.
If they're acting individually,
they take a plural, VE.
Example, the team are debating among
themselves, this is correct, as it implies
the individual members of the team are
debating not the team as a single entity.
Mistake.
Incorrect use of articles with uncountable
nouns, explanation, uncountable
nouns such as information advise.
Furniture news, do not take indefinite
articles, a and and generally are not.
Pluralized example, he gave me
an advice error, should be some
advice or a piece of advice.
You can't count advice like
you count apples, mistake,
redundancy, or superfluous words.
Explanation.
This is about using more words
than necessary to convey meaning.
It often pops up in phrases
like return back, repeat again.
Final outcome.
Example, he returned back to his home.
Error back is redundant.
If you return, you are
already coming back.
Misconception, more than one
always takes a plural verb.
Explanation.
Nope.
More than one is actually followed by
a singular noun and a singular verb.
It's tricky.
I know.
Example, more than one friend was absent.
This is correct.
Mistake dangling modifiers.
Explanation.
A modifier, which is a word or
phrase that describes another
word or phrase, is dangling.
If it's not clearly or logically
attached to the word it's supposed
to modify, it's like leaving
your car keys, hanging in midair.
Example, walking down the
street, the trees were beautiful.
Error.
This implies that trees were walking.
It should be something like walking
down the street, I saw beautiful trees.
By being super vigilant about these
common pitfalls, my friends, you can
significantly reduce your error rate.
It's like learning
where the landmines are.
W Edge framework summary.
Let's quickly summarize error spotting
with our Trustee W Edge framework.
Think of it as the quick
recap before the break.
So what is error spotting?
It's identifying grammatical, syntactical,
or lexical errors in sentences.
Why do we do it?
To ensure clear, correct, and
effective communication, which is
absolutely crucial for professional
roles and competitive exams.
When is it applied During language
proficiency tests, editing, proofreading,
and any form of formal communication.
Where is it found in the English language?
Sections of competitive exams,
like your exam, and in all forms of
written and spoken communication.
Who needs to know this?
Exam?
Candidates, writers, editors, and anyone
who aims for precise language use.
How do we do it?
By applying grammatical rules,
analyzing sentence structure, and
recognizing common error patterns.
Simple yet powerful.
Fully worked out examples.
All right, my friends, let's get
down to business with some fully
worked out examples to show you how
this error spotting magic happens.
Example, one question, identify the part
of the sentence that contains an error.
A manager told the B employees
that C, every one of them were
expected 2D on time options.
A manager told B employees that C,
every one of them were D on time.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution, step one.
Let's analyze this sentence
for subject verb agreement.
The subject of the clause, every one
of them were expected is everyone.
The phrase of them is just
a prepositional phrase.
It doesn't mess with the subject's number.
Everyone is an indefinite pronoun
and it's always singular, no
matter how many people are in them.
Step two, now, check the verb
associated with our subject.
The verb used is were expected
and were is a plural verb.
Uh oh.
We have a mismatch.
Step three.
So the mismatch is clear since.
Everyone is singular.
It absolutely requires a singular verb.
The plural verb war is incorrect.
Step four, what's the correct form?
Then?
The singular form of
war is, was step five.
Therefore, the error lies squarely
in part C because every one of
them were, should correctly be.
Every one of them was.
Correct sentence.
The manager told the employees
that every one of them was expected
to attend the meeting on time.
Example, two question identified the part
of the sentence that contains an error.
She.
A is more smarter than B. Any other
friend in C, her class excelling in D,
all subjects options A, is more smarter.
B, any other friend C, her class D,
all subjects understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Step one, let's examine the
comparative adjective usage Here.
The word smarter is already
a comparative adjective.
It's formed by simply adding ER to smart.
Now, the word more is used to form the
comparative degree of longer adjectives,
like more beautiful or more intelligent.
Step two.
So what's the redundancy?
Using both more and smarter together
creates a double comparative.
This is grammatically incorrect
and totally redundant.
It's like saying more dollar,
you just don't Step three.
What's the correct form?
You should either use smarter,
which is the correct and
preferred comparative form.
Or more smart, though smarter is much
more common, but definitely not both.
Step four.
So the error is in part A, due to that
redundant use of more with smarter.
It's like wearing two
belts when one is enough.
Correct sentence.
She is smarter than any
other friend in her class.
Excelling in all subjects.
Example, three question.
Identify the part of the sentence that
contains an error, neither a, the friends.
Nor B, the teacher were C,
present at the D annual function
causing much disappointment.
Options A, nor the teacher B were present.
C, annual function D. Much disappointment.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution, step one.
First, let's nail down the rule
for the neither nor conjunction.
When neither nor connects two
subjects, the verb always agrees with
the subject that is closest to it.
This is a golden rule.
Step two, identify the subjects and
which one is closest to the verb.
The two subjects here are the
friends, which is plural, and
the teacher, which is singular.
The subject closest to the verb
were present is clearly the teacher.
Step three.
Now check for verb agreement
with that closest subject.
The teacher is singular, but the verb used
is were present, which is a plural verb.
Uh oh, another mismatch.
Step four, what's the correct form then?
The singular form of word.
Is was step five.
Therefore the error is in part B
because the verb were, does not
agree with the singular subject.
The teacher, it's like the verb,
forgot its manners correct sentence.
Neither the friends nor the teacher
was present at the annual function
causing much disappointment.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.